Specifically, extended mind, extended cognition, externalism, distributed cognition and the social brain, are concepts of cognitive sciences and philosophy of mind that do not necessarily involve technology. Augmented reality, virtual reality and teleoperation can be framed as a form of augmented intelligence, moreover, for their novel influence on cognition. Brain-computer interfaces directly record electromagnetic impulses of neural substrates to control, for instance, external devices like a robotic arm, and raise issues of the exo-self and the exo-body. Augmented intelligence must be distinguished from artificial intelligence, which implies a complete autonomy of machine intelligence from human intelligence despite sharing a logical and technological ground; and from swarm intelligence, which describes decentralized and spontaneous forms of organization in animals, humans and algorithmic bots. In the field of neuropharmacology, nootropics refers to drugs that improve mental functions such as memory, motivation and attention. Like artificial intelligence, the idea of augmented intelligence bred (especially in science fiction) a family of visionary terms that is not possible to summarized here.The relation between cognitive faculties, labour and computation was already present in the pioneering work of Charles Babbage. The "division of mental labour" was the managerial notion at the basis of his famous calculating engines which aimed to improve industrial production. The concept of augmented intelligence itself was first introduced in cybernetics by Engelbart, who was influenced by the works of Bush on the Memex, Ashby  on intelligence amplification, Licklider on man-computer symbiosis, and Ramo on intellectronics, among others. In his seminal paper, Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework, Engelbart provides a definition of augmented intelligence specifically oriented to problem solving,By 'augmenting human intellect' we mean increasing the capability of a man to approach a complex problem situation, to gain comprehension to suit his particular needs, and to derive solutions to problems. Increased capability in this respect is taken to mean a mixture of the following: more-rapid comprehension, better comprehension, the possibility of gaining a useful degree of comprehension in a situation that previously was too complex, speedier solutions, better solutions, and the possibility of finding solutions to problems that before seemed insoluble. And by 'complex situations' we include the professional problems of diplomats, executives, social scientists, life scientists, physical scientists, attorneys, designers--whether the problem situation exists for twenty minutes or twenty years.Engelbart was a pioneer of graphic user interfaces and network technologies, inventor of the computer mouse and founder of the Augmentation Research Center at Stanford University. The methodology called bootstrapping was the guiding principle of his research laboratory and aimed to establish a recursive improvement in the interaction between human intelligence and computer design (the term has also been adopted by artificial intelligence to describe a hypothetical system that learns how to improve itself recursively, that is by observing itself learning, although such a system at present has never been successfully designed). Engelbart’s vision was eminently political and progressive: any form of augmentation of individual intelligence would immediately result in an augmentation of the collective and political intelligence of humankind. Despite the fact that Engelbart does not account for possiblerisks, social frictions and cognitive traumas due to the introduction of augmented intelligence technologies, his combined technological and political definition can be useful to draw a conceptual map of augmented intelligence.Conceptual Axes of AugmentationThe conceptual field of augmented intelligence can be illustrated along two main axes: a technological axis (that describes the degree of complexity from traditional mnemo-techniques to the most sophisticated knowledge machines) and a political axis (that described the scale of intellectual augmentation from the individual to a social dimension).Any technique of external memory (such as the alphabet or numbers) has always represented an extension of human cognition. McLuhan underlined how innovations such as printing press and electronic media caused a further expansion of our senses on a global scale, affecting cognitive organization and, therefore, social organization. After McLuhan, it is possible to periodize the history of augmented intelligence in four epistemic periods according to the medium of cognitive augmentation: sign (alphabet, numbers, symbolic forms), information (radio, TV, communication networks), algorithm (data mining, computer modelling, simulation and forecasting), and artificial intelligence (expert systems and self-learning agents: as a hypothetical limit). The interaction between the human mind and techniques of augmentation is recursive, as humankind has always continued improving them. Turing’s essay 'Computing Machinery and Intelligence' strongly advised the investigation of a machine that one day could "think by itself". The hypothesis of artificial intelligence is, trivially, that of an autonomy of the machine from the human and, more interestingly, that of a new kind of alliance between the two forms of cognition. Across the history of recent media culture, the use of the expressions information explosion and knowledge explosion is notable for denoting a paradigm break towards new forms of civilization. Without providing scientific evidence, Vinge has defined as the 'technological singularity' as the hypothetical moment in which intelligent machines will show emergent properties and produce an "intelligence explosion"  beyond human control. The political consequences of augmented intelligence are immediately manifested as soon as a large scale of interaction and computation is reached. Indeed, Engelbart’s project was conceived to help problem solving on a global scale of complexity: the collective scale cannot be severed by any definition of augmented intelligence. A vast tradition of thought has already underlined the collective intellect as an autonomous agent not necessarily embodied in technological apparatuses . See the notions of: general intellect, noosphere, extra-cortical organisation, world brain, cultural capital, mass intellectuality, collective intelligence. Across this tradition, "the autonomy of the general intellect" has been proposed by autonomist Marxism as the novel political composition emerging out of postFordism. The project of such a political singularity is perfectly specular to the a-political model of the Technological Singularity.The combination (and antagonism) of the technological and political axes describes a trajectory towards augmented social intelligence. Under this definition, however, political conflicts, on one side, and the computational aporias, on the other, are not resolved. Deleuze and Guattari’s notion of the machinic inspired also by the idea of mechanology by Simondon was a similar attempt to describe, in conjunction, the technological and political composition of society without falling either into fatalism or into utopianism. Among the notions of augmentation, moreover, it is worth recalling their concepts of machinic surplus value and code surplus value.Any optimistic endorsement of new technologies for human augmentation regularly encounters different forms of criticism. ‘Artificial Intelligence winters’, for instance, are those periods of reduced funding and fall of institutional interest also due to public scepticism. A first example of popular criticism toward augmented intelligence in the modern age would be the Venetian editor Hieronimo Squarciafico. After working for years with Aldus Manuntius’s pioneering press, he stated in an aphorism, an "abundance of books makes men less studious". The essay 'The Question ConcerningTechnology' by Heidegger is considered a main reference for technological critique in continental philosophy. Heidegger influenced a specific tradition of techno-scepticism: Stiegler, for instance, has developed the idea that any external mnemo-technique produces a general grammatization and, therefore, a proletarization of the collective mind with a consequent loss of knowledge and savoir-vivre. Berardi has repeatedly remarked upon the de-erotization of the collective body produced by digital technologies and the regime of contemporary semio-capitalism. The physical and temporal limits of human cognition when interacting with a pervasive mediascape is generally addressed by the debate on attention economy. The discipline of neuropedagogy has been claimed as a response to widespread techniques of cognitive enhancement and a pervasive mediascape. Specifically dedicated to the impact of the internet on quality of reading, learning and memory, the controversial essay 'Is Google Making Us Stupid?' by Carr is also relevant in this context. The thesis of the nefarious effect of digital technologies on the human brain has been contested by neuroscientists. Carr’s political analysis, interestingly, aligns him with the continental philosophers just mentioned: "what Taylor did for the work of the hand, Google is doing for the work of the mind". A more consistent and less fatalistic critique of the relation between digital technologies and human knowledge addresses the primacy of sensation and embodiment  and the role of the 'nonconscious' in distributed cognition. In neomaterialist philosophy, it is feminism, in particular, that has underlined how the extended or augmented mind is always embodied and situated.Along the lineage of French techno-vitalism, yet turned into a neo-reactionary vision, Land has propagated the idea of capitalism itself as a form of alien and autonomous intelligence. The recent 'Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics' has responded to this fatalist scenario by proposing to challenge such a level of complexity and abstraction: the idea is to repurpose capitalism’s infrastructures of computation (usually controlled by corporations and oligopolies) to augment collective political intelligence. The project CyberSyn sponsored by the Chilean government in 1971 to control the national economy via a supercomputer is usually mentioned as a first rudimentary example of such a revolutionary cybernetics. More recently, Negarestani has advocated a functional linearity between the philosophy of reason, the political project of social intelligence and the design of the next computational machine, where the logical distinction between augmented intelligence and artificial intelligence would no longer make any sense. The definition of augmented intelligence, however, will always be bound to an empirical ground that is useful to sound the consistency of any political or technological dream to come.