In September 2011, as the Occupy Wall Street encampment at Zuccotti Park swarmed with protesters in Guy Fawkes masks popularized by the hacktivist group Anonymous, the New York City Police Department resurrected an 1845 law that deemed two or more people wearing masks in public illegal, unless a masquerade party was being thrown. The police failed to recognize, however, that a global masquerade was already under way. From Occupy and the Arab Spring to black blocs and Pussy Riot, a particular politics of appearance is playing out today focused on obfuscation, imperceptibility, invisibility, and illegibility. The common enemy is political representation, here defined as state-sponsored “legitimizing” processes conducted by techniques of recognition standardization. Simply, representation is what makes something intelligible, visible, and classifiable on the state’s terms. This is why cultural theorist McKenzie Wark clearly states, “All representation is false.” In this politics of the not-identifiable, what follows after the refusal of representation is varied: While Wark’s alternative is the politics of the hack, virtuality, and expression, philosopher Giorgio Agamben’s abandonment of representation and identity is found in the concept of whatever singularity, which he proclaims accurately describes the coming community of political revolt. Occupy’s slogan of “No Demands” also resists representational legitimation by withdrawing from political negotiation with the state. There is the Autonomist Marxist tradition of exodus and desertion, which Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri highlight with Herman Melville’s character Bartleby, whose declaration “I would prefer not to” is read as a refusal so absolute that Bartleby is reduced to pure passivity, a generic being, that is outside of classification. The art collective Bernadette Corporation’s video on “identity-less” protest is titled after the command that Bartleby undoubtedly follows--Get Rid of Yourself. Such withdrawals harken to Hakim Bey’s temporary autonomous zone as well as media theorists Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker’s technological updating of TAZ with the tactics of nonexistence. While protest tactics to evade recognition, such as masked protest, are visually iconic to this politics, perhaps it is the writings of The Invisible Committee and Tiqqun, described as “ultra- left” and “pre-terrorist” by the French government, that best capture this general sentiment. In The Coming Insurrection, faceless actions and fictional acronyms are encouraged; “Flee visibility. Turn anonymity into an offensive position,” they write. In an earlier text “How Is It to Be Done?” they state, “I need to become anonymous. In order to be present. The more I am anonymous, the more I am present.” In an earlier text, “The Cybernetic Hypothesis,” they succinctly claim that “fog makes revolt possible.” This varied political stance, if it is united at all, demonstrates a withdrawal from forms of recognition control as well as a refusal or antagonism toward becoming perceptible and intelligible to powers of domination. What is left is a presence that strives to be illegible.These political desires coincide with global financial crisis, multiplying uprisings, and brutal police violence. This is an age that has been called Empire, Deleuzian Capitalism, The Fourth World War, and digital and liquid capitalism, all emphasizing rapid, neoliberal flows, fluxes, and networks of protocological control, management, and informatic capture. This is Tiqqun’s cybernetic capitalism, an imperial government where all life is networked, administrated, and programmable. Similarly, Galloway and Thacker have labeled the current century as an “era of universal standards of identification” by pointing toward technologies like genomics, biometrics, real-time tracking, and collaborative filters that bind identification with locatability. “Henceforth,” they write, “the lived environment will be divided into identifiable zones and nonidentifiable zones, and nonidentifiables will be the shadowy new ‘criminal’ classes–those that do not identify.” Such statements affirm that this politics of the imperceptible is an identity politics, so for those that celebrated the collapse of such ventures at the close of the 1990s, identity--or identification--politics are back (but, of course, they were never really gone). This all suggests twists and turns for queerness, which I will attend to shortly.Notably, the perceptual tone to this politics is darkness. A general definition of darkness is the absence of visible light; its appearance black in color.1 In darkness, identification and classification become difficult, if impossible. The black bloc embodies such darkness, but there is also a pervasive, multifarious darkness casting its shadow across the intellectual spectrum. In speculative realism, a strand of continental philosophy, ontological darkness and dark vitalism figure as concepts that stress the ontological obscurantism of nature, a cosmic nihilism, at once terrifying, cold, and indifferent to the human, a darkness, which, at its root, is the product of men taking pleasure in the monstrosities of H.P. Lovecraft. It is a darkness that formally denies access, just as Graham Harman’s objects, in his object-oriented philosophy, forever withdrawal from the world, so that they are never fully known. In contemporary art, Gregory Sholette has adapted the concept of dark matter to describe artistic production that remains invisible to the art world proper. In media theory, Alexander Galloway has written of a “dark Deleuzianism” as the flipside to rhizomatic cyber- utopianism. In his recent essay “Black Box, Black Bloc,” Galloway charts the coterminous rise of cybernetics and black box technologies with invisible revolt tactics, like the black bloc. He writes, “Today, it is no longer a question of simply the enemy’s black box but the black boxing of the self.” This black boxing of the self -- this politics of the imperceptible, invisible, nonidentifiable -- is a withdrawal that is a darkening out or making illegible as an antagonistic refusal. Here, darkness becomes the shade of being- against.Now, queerness also has its darkness. In his 2011 book The Queer Art of Failure, Jack Halberstam articulates a queer darkness through the writings of Daphne Brooksand the black mirror paintings of Monica Majoli. Although queer darkness might evoke the isolation, pain, unattainability, and horror of dark vitalism, it is directly coded as cultural, political, and social; queer darkness’ horror is the stuff of failure and the miserable. Queerness teaches us that darkness has gendered, sexed, and raced dimensions, and therefore aligns more with Galloway’s black boxing of the self. Halberstam writes, “darkness becomes a crucial part of a queer aesthetic...an aesthetics of opacity...an interpretative strategy...as well as a way of being in the world...the queer subject as shadow and shadowed seems to cast the construction of queerness as secondary to the primacy of heterosexual arrangements of gender and relationality, but in fact it comments upon the disruptive potential of shadow worlds.” Queer darkness is the refusal to cohere, to become legible, to see like a state; it also carefully attends to the relations of darkness and blackness.2 Queer darkness bursts forth from colonial rage, colored struggle, dissent in US slavery, and the decolonial project. Halberstam considers queer darkness as something that forms through particular subject positions, like the colonized and the slave, but also the punk, anti- social feminist, and butch woman. These subjects, dark for specific reasons, turn darkness into an opportunity for resistance, protest, and struggle.Yet, if the politics of illegibility is both a refusal and a withdrawal, Halberstam introduces shadow feminisms to explain the subtractive element of queer darkness. A “weapon of the weak,” shadow feminisms convey passivity or inaction, the removal of qualities, unraveling--an “art of unbecoming.” There is a negativity at play, connected to the anti-social turn in queer theory, that is decidedly dark and shadowed. Halberstam cites the Caribbean novelist Jamaica Kincaid and the passive masochistic performances of Yoko Ono and Marina Abramović as examples of such shadowed refusals that are withdrawals into a negative dismantling. Queer darkness is a “startling absence,” a disappearance, the refusal to be.If, in the past, queerness has invested in gaining visibility, why the unintuitive turn to illegibility and darkness, which seemingly evokes Leo Bersani’s dreaded “gay absence” once again? While Nicholas de Villiers’ new work on queer opacity traces tactics of illegibility practiced by queer figures throughout the 20th century, a recent study of biometric facial recognition and sexual orientation presents a contemporary example that engages universal standards of identification and the potential black boxing of the self. The Journal of Experimental Social Psychology recently published a 2008 study conducted at Tufts University that tested people’s ability to identify homosexual men from photos of their faces. Ninety faces were shown to ninety participants, and those tested proved remarkably accurate in their ability to recognize faces that had been classified as homosexual, even when exposed to the face for only 50 milliseconds. Arguably, this study further confirms and scientifically validates one of the processes of homosexual stereotyping, such as “fag face” and “gay face.”Biometric facial recognition heightens the investment in the face as a site for ethics. Philosophers from Emmanuel Levinas to Judith Butler have argued that the human face is where ethical commitment calls out. Their writings suggest that the more visible and close-up the face, the more it ethnically implores. However, communications theorist Kelly Gates argues that biometric facial detection complicates this ethics because it empowers a regime of identification complicit with neoliberal governance. Thus, instead of making the face visible to the other in political struggle, it is now cloaked, hidden, black boxed. The biometric version of fag face appears to necessitate a queer darkening, a making illegible of the face. French philosophers Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari taught us not so long ago: “to the point that if human beings have a destiny, it is rather to escape the face, to dismantle the face and facializations, to become imperceptible, to become clandestine [. . .] by strange true becomings that[. . .] make faciality traits themselves finally elude the organization of the face.” Yet, knowing the organizations of the face is crucial: “Know them, know your faces; it is the only way you will be able to dismantle them and draw your lines of flight.” Deleuze and Guattari have sketched nothing less than an outline for the tactical uses of faces.If queer darkness is a weapon, as Halberstam notes, then the face can be weaponized and biometrics can be used in antagonistic ways. Queer darkness turns the face into a force of refusal. In the wake of Anonymous and the black bloc, facelessness is a threat, hence the New York City law prohibiting masks. There are many examples of weaponizing the face in recent political protest and revolt, from the Zapatistas, who hide their faces so that they may be seen, to the female freedom fighters in the 1966 film The Battle of Algiers, who perform a terrorist drag by wearing their oppressors’ clothes and faces in order to break into occupied territory. The artist Arthur Elsenaar has developed electro-facial choreography to liberate the expressive potentials of the face from what he views as the brain’s tyrannical rule over the body. All these gestures powerfully resonate with the revolutionary fervor and name of the anarchist art group Black Mask. Weaponizing the face through obfuscation also has a queer and feminist dimension, from Chicana feminist Gloria Anzaldua’s writings on “making face” to the more recent pink-toned nonidentifiability of Bash Back!In response to emerging studies that link successfully determining sexual orientation through rapid facial recognition techniques, I am developing a Facial Weaponization Suite. The suite provides sets of masks for public protest, such as “collective masks” that allow people to wear the faces of many with a single mask. One mask, the Fag Face Mask, is generated from the biometric facial data of many queer men’s faces. This facial data is gathered into a single three-dimensional surface; when brought together in 3D modelling software, the result is a mutated, alien facial mask thatcannot be read or parsed by universal standards of identification. Like the black bloc, the Fag Face Mask uses collectivity to evade individual detection. Although pink in color, the mask is surely dark in its refusal to abide by biometric facial identification and its simultaneous withdrawal from the being that has become all too knowable in cybernetic capitalism.In Galloway’s version of this dark politics, he states, “a practical nonexistence...[a] subtractive being...might be the only thing today that capitalism cannot eventually co- opt.” For Galloway, this is “the purest form of love,” a communization akin to Agamben’s whatever community; for Halberstam, this is a celebration of failure. Might queer darkness be invested in both this love and failure? Does the Facial Weaponization Suite locate the illegible, impenetrable face as a site for both? The Fag Face Mask highlights both contemporary refusals of representation and the pleasure to withdrawal into a global masquerade of darkness. In a longer version of this essay, I explore the relations and tensions of darkness and blackness, paying particular attention to critical race theorists that engage blackness and illegibility, such as Fred Moten’s theorization of blackness as fugitivity in In the Break: The Aesthetics of the Black Radical Tradition as well as Darby English’s How to See a Work of Art in Total Darkness. For the purposes of this essay, I focus specifically on Halberstam’s engagement with darkness.