In your latest monograph Blog Theory: Feedback and Capture in the Circuits of Drive, you deploy the medium of the blog to address the general cultural condition set in motion as a result of our everyday participation in networked communications. The blog, (although addressed directly as well), operates as a kind of cipher for the articulation of what you call ‘communicative capitalism’ - the exploitation of communication as a circulating force, as an end in and for itself. Through a Lacanian lens, you identify this circulating movement of perpetual communication as drive, drive being that inhumanly human category of pleasure derived from endlessly repetitive, non-goal oriented actions. Drive, as you have written, attains satisfaction in always missing its mark. The state of communicative capitalism you have described, is largely characterised by a decline in symbolic efficiency, where there is no longer any Master signifier stabilising meaning. Rather than enabling an emancipatory possibility of other modes of sense-making or of subjectification, as many enthusiasts have heralded, this absence of an anchor of meaning ultimately creates anxiety, insecurity, suspends identifications and generates new forms of subjection as a way to ease pressures of the imperative to enjoy.
I am quite sure you have received some backlash for this diagnosis, from those who champion blogging as citizen-journalism, or social media as helping to link peoples together for political congregation, or even with the example of the WikiLeaks platform to function as an archive and distribution channel of otherwise protected documents. How do you negotiate these critiques and the theorization of this cacophonous medium that in a lot of instances circulates banal videos of kittens playing iPads, but in some cases distributes secret documents revelatory of political malfeasance? Could a distinction be made, perhaps, between circulatory practices (forwarding, retweeting, reposting) and distributive practices (authorship)?
Considering communication is a commodity in and for itself, a commodity one ‘pays’ for with attention (the finite and therefore scarce amount of minutes of a day) in order to participate within and for this stream of circulation, I am wondering if it is also of relevance to fold into the use-value/exchange-value equation, a third term of ‘exhibition-value’. Originally elaborated in Benjamin’s The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction, denoting a transformation of artworks from their ritual status (here we could link that to a corpus of collective meaning), towards their sheer fitness for exhibition, or view-ability. This shifting is quantitative (a photograph can appear in many places simultaneously, like bits of information on the web), but this utter visibility and attention also becomes a qualitative marker underlying the work in question. 
Compounding use-value/exchange-value with exhibition-value in regards to communication, also calls into relation the notion of the gaze, which you have addressed at length in your book. With the decline of symbolic efficiency you have demonstrated, we no longer have an imagined Other of the ego ideal for whom to exhibit ourselves, but something vastly more traumatic which deals with our own “entrapment within the field of the visible: I see only from one point, but in my existence I am looked at from all sides”, in your words. Since we are no longer sure of how we are seen (where we are mentioned, who is googling us), we have a great deal of uncertainty as to our position within the symbolic order. Firstly, do you see relevance in incorporating the notion of exhibition-value within the paradigm of communicative capitalism, and how does the quantification (visibility) of communication impact its qualification (sense-making)?
That something is said rather than what is said reflects a type of speech-act without qualities and can be seen as an enactment of the generic potentiality to communicate. You have raised this issue under the guise of ‘whatever-blogging’ in your book, where ‘whatever’ denotes a preference-free, minimum degree of the communicative gesture, expressing no preference whatsoever, yet not ignoring. You deploy the tag of ‘whatever’ to describe a ‘glitch in orality’, where exchange is thwarted in advance even as it adopts a communicative form. You twist the emancipatory notion of whatever-being from Agamben’s ‘Coming Community’; that is, his idea of a new kind of communal subjectivity that belongs as such, but to nothing in particular – an essence-less subject, uninscribed by Modern identities of ethnicity, nationality, etc. Can you elaborate your critique of whatever-ness, and how these ‘glitches in orality’ operate upon contemporary subjectivity?
So is it fair to say, borrowing on the language of Badiou, that these glitches of ‘whatever’ communication can perform a function of negation (blocking a given course) yet can be only be fleetingly effective politically since these glitches in orality ultimately miss the mark in affirming that very negation, that is, the following through on the gesture of negation to transform a blockage into a collective impetus of/for novel political re-structuring or enduring contestation?
Because we can engage the minimum degree of communicative awareness (whatever-exchanges) as we participate via circulation within this vast archive of the web – there seems to be an underlying thread in your book towards the lack of fidelity or follow-through in our communicative gestures. What I am getting at here is the capacity to easily ‘unhook’ from the web, or as you say, ‘exit’ at almost any point of exchange with no consequences – as such, there is little fidelity to being bound to our own words. I would very much agree with this diagnosis for people who can participate on the web with relative freedom, but since the operations of the web still fall under sovereign jurisdiction, I don’t see the consequences of words being universally addressable. For example, I may take to my blog to radically criticize the German government, but when the same words are used by a blogger like Ai WeiWei criticizing the Chinese government, the consequences are wholly (and dangerously) other. How does sovereign interference and jurisdiction operate in your theory of communicative capitalism? How do the various states of permission delineated by sovereign protocols work upon our fidelity to the words we speak?
The archive, in its conventional form, is usually an institutionalised space for the collection, preservation and cataloguing of artefacts, images, and documents, where there is a clear, authoritative structure validating its contents. Interested researchers and people purposefully sift through organized and trusted materials to gather exemplary evidence for an argument or narrative. When we consider the web as a practice of archiving, the circulation of communication, there are substantially less degrees of accountability (I hesitate to say no accountability, since brand-name news sites like the New York Times, are generally apprehended as trust-worthy, adhering to journalistic codes). With this lack of authority inherent to the sprawling nature of the web, you have identified three modes through which such trust in content is delivered: via search engines (trust in the algorithm); via blogs (trust in knowing the knower); and via social media (trust in the audience of friends). How do these three modes of trust-making work amongst themselves? How does authority in communicative capitalism operate via an economy of attention?
Word-clouds are the devices you have so poignantly used as an example in tagging the shift from the qualitative to the quantitative in information apprehension. In word-clouds all context, word proximity and meaning is lost in favour of repetition. Anecdotally, I was recently at a lecture where the speaker made a word-cloud out of various definitions of democracy he found on the web, so we were left with ‘people’ and ‘government’ as the weighted words. Now these two words would probably appear as weighted in almost any definition of political organization, whether totalitarian, fascist or democratic. Needless to say I found this quite infuriating, as there was no attempt to think a definition, and the word-cloud was presented as semantically self-evident to the audience. In your view, is this shift from the semantic to word density a result of the economisation of attention in relation to an over-abundance of information (we simply have no time for the deduction of meaning)? How does this shift fundamentally alter processes of thinking?
I think this discussion of semantics is quite interesting, especially when one starts to fold in the issues of net-based activism. The most prominent (of late) forms of net activism from the likes of WikiLeaks and OpenLeaks instigate tools for transparency as a mode public accountability and (possibly) justice. These are of course not particularly novel ideas in the field of journalism, journalists have historically used anonymous sources and leaked documents in order to reveal malfeasance, but the platforms for collecting have been technologically overhauled with encryption devices – making this data collection on a world-wide scale feasible. Both organizations allow users to supply documents anonymously (which as we have seen with the case of Bradley Manning, is not 100% secure), yet they deliberately avoid semantics – collecting a vast archive of documents that are later ‘sorted’ semantically by news organisations and woven into digestible articles. There is definitely a hope from these organisations that the exposure of information will generate tangible, political repercussions – indeed many people have written about the influence organisations such as WikiLeaks have had on some elections as well as providing informational impetus against certain political regimes. What I think is of relevance (Zizek has also spoken to this), is that these leaks did not in fact reveal something surprising, they mainly served to confirm suspicions about activities of diplomacy and war. That said, do these transparency tools, as well intended as they may be, not risk falling into the trap of the fetishist disavowal, meaning that we all know better, but…whatever. As a theorist / philosopher of both media and politics, I’m curious to hear your take on these new tools for the facilitation of informational transparency – how do these mechanisms for exposure operate politically? What are the ‘semantic responsibilities’ of this type of political activism?
You critique the democratic promise of this global network under the guise of a communalist ideal in your book – that the ability to collaborate, generate and share information would create freer, more fulfilled forms of being. What was (and often still is) envisioned as a space for individual expression accessible to many across the globe, you have situated in the category of a ‘displaced mediator’ – that is a device, platform or idea that accounts for fundamental change, yet where the mediator is quickly overtaken or radically shifted by the very change it has instigated. What has been striking to me seeing the net develop from a relatively insider perspective (I pay the bills designing/programming websites) is how quickly processes of gentrification and ‘centrification’ have occurred – much more rapidly than in any urban comparison. By ‘centrification’ I mean the paradox of a medium that wills to sprawl (the network) vis-à-vis centralized hubs through which a large chunk of communicative activity passes (this calls to mind your reference to power laws). By gentrification, I mean the visual franchising of expressive platforms (we appear with the same Facebook layout, generic blogging templates, Flickr accounts and so forth). What these platforms offer (and market) is the promise of connection, sharing and self expression, but I think what needs to be questioned is the relation between self-expression and self-exposure. What I am getting at here is this capacity to express ‘whatever’ statements through a centralised hub, in a generic presentation form, coupled with the exposure these statements engender for both an unknown gaze and the gaze of trending/marketing (and ultimately revenue generating enterprises). As someone who is both critical of networked communication, and an active blogger, how do you negotiate this expression/exposure threshold? 
You conclude your book questioning the very possibilities proffered by the networked form in itself as a tool of potent political agency – pointing to a critical doubt of trying to overcome communicative capitalism through the means of participatory circulation that foster its particular hegemony. You postulate that overcoming this hegemony might require a radical cut in our ethos and practice of communicative circulation. As we are very much caught in these circuits of communicative drive, it is extremely difficult to imagine outside these frames as to how this cut would manifest and what other forms communication might take, without resorting to regressive modes of nostalgia for the ‘good old days’. As tough, and perhaps impossible to answer as this may be, do you have any speculations as to how this cut in the circuits of drive might come about? How could we begin to affirmatively counter this hyper-circulation within which we are caught, (by affirmative I mean not merely blocking circulation, but affirming other models of communicative co-existence)?

