
With half a decade since the 2008 financial crisis, a far more distressing crisis has emerged among all the proposed reform strategies, austerity measures and jagged-edged line-graphs: a crisis of imagination. This is rather surprising seeing as how much creativity it took to get us into this plight. From the decoupling of the dollar with the gold standard in 1971, to a situation where even negative value (debt) generates profits in excess of our wildest dreams–to a layperson such as myself, this is an achievement of alchemist-like proportions. Just as currency was becoming an object of speculation (and not just a tool of equivalence), the first academic journal of finance economics emerged in 1974, paving the socio-economic road we (rapidly) travel down today. That the ideas and spirit of the finance economics endemic to the neoliberal revolution were birthed in academia should give us pause against the many critics who suggest the university is an elitist tower at a gaping distance from ‘lived’ life. This is not to say that ideas floating about in specialist journals are the impetus of popular change, but that every novel transformation of our condition is rooted in thought, more crucially the experience of thought, and its incorporation into a localization or a ‘doing’. Thoughts carry potency, and without resorting to utter discursive constructivism, when it comes to the contingency of socio-economic order, organization of peoples, exchange, distribution, technology, communication, logistics and goods, there are countless possibilities to be tested (and presuppositions as to the nature of existence to be contested). The successful uptake of the financialization project testifies to the potency of enacted thought: ideas and ideals launched in a mountain village in Switzerland and functionally modelled in Chicago have come to shape our everyday condition on a global scale. The self-fulfilling prophecy of financial models, evidenced by Donald MacKenzie’s analysis of the incorporation of the Black-Scholes-Merton model of efficient pricing upon the development (and ‘legitimacy’) of the Futures Market, points to the performative requirement (or positive feedback) underpinning the propagation of ‘fictitious capital’. Marx’s now infamously prophetic turn-of-phrase, fictitious capital refers to where value takes on properties beyond what can be realized in the commodity form (like credit, shares and debt), and is, in part, why those who write under the rubric of ‘cognitive capitalism’ often diagnose our situation as entirely linguistic, meaning that it, like language, refers to nothing other than itself in a logic of recursivity. It is the sort of potential embodied by the premise of recursivity that drives MacKenzie to pose the open question at the end of his book: ‘What sort of world do we want to see performed?’.  It is also behind Arne de Boever’s call for a ‘reclaiming of fiction within financial culture’ where ‘sign-practices’ are a primary site of action in a semio-capital world and the Accelerationists’ call for the creation of an alter ‘intellectual infrastructure’ as a counter Mont-Pèlerin Society in their manifesto (along with institutions and economic protocols) to cope with the cataclysmic socio-ecological condition that we are currently facing. Beyond the internal debates amongst these positions, which are plentiful, what becomes apparent is the urgent need for alternative modes of organisation, embracing a logic of and for a new world. These calls urge and provoke us towards the future (and not Futures!); they seek to affirm the creation of novel structures of cohabitation, rather than inhabiting a purely critical space (negation with no alternative); they seek more than an escapist tactic (solipsistic retreat); they do not aim merely to throw a wrench into the cogs of the machinery (sabotage); they demand much more. They ask of us not to rest on diagnostics alone concerning our contemporary plight, but propel us to speculate on what does not yet exist, to speculate on the inexistent—an imaginative force of the most rigorous and courageous sort.
Dominated by spectre of ‘the economy’ (rather than ‘economies’ in the plural and diversified sense), the relations of production, distribution and consumption have been subsumed within a totalized and autonomous domain since the mid-twentieth century. In more recent discourse, Nick Srnicek has extended the (non)picture of ‘the economy’ under neoliberal reign as a hyperobject, meaning that it has grown so complex and manifold that no one (including experts) can grasp its contours or scope, nor reduce its effects to individual, causal components. The autonomous hyperobject of ‘the economy’ that ideologically governs us today seems to obscure the possibility of a cognitive map, for there exists a vast gap between our localized experiences of the world and the real global conditions that produce it. As Srnicek suggests, fiction may be a tool for overcoming this gap, yet cognitively mapping our given condition does not alone propel us into the realm of a speculative future—it is but a humble (though daunting) first step. Hyperobjects (for example, climate change) display their properties only as traces of residual information, or after-effects of various component interactions, like carbon emissions depicted in multi-coloured, 3D, animated form. The fictions that loom today across popular media seem, at best, only able to evolve scenarios based on the extension of these informational residues evidenced by the obsessive treatment of the apocalyptic narrative of either war or climate induced catastrophe (the end-of-the-world before the end of capitalism position). The only other ready alternative is presented within the actual sphere of finance and the rather science-fiction scenario of increased algorithmic governance played out in the high-frequency trading arena—where the only limitations seem to be the laws of physics and geographical impediments that can be overcome through technological/geo-engineering mastery. The sphere of finance capital and the envisioning of our demise on a species-wide level seem to be at the reigns of our collective narrative—a world in which Ray Brassier proposes the image of the Phyllium, a leaf insect that mimics its own food and ends up cannibalising its others. These scenarios seize upon the diagnostic actuality of our situation and thrust it towards its existing logical telos, never, however, moving beyond diagnostic or ‘known’ thought. These fictions may appear to oppose or at least set off a warning siren as to our actual or ‘logical’ future, yet like the properties of hyperobjects themselves, they inhere and reinforce existing modes of operation without offering any alternatives (they merely dramatize and perpetuate the same logic). The possibilities of fiction and its potential role in cognitively mapping the experiential conflict between local existence and global paradigm, may serve as an initial step, yet it is worth to recall Oscar Wilde’s romantic sentiment: ‘A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth even glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is always landing’. A cognitive map of the future is always somewhat impossible. While we seem quite adept in the proliferation of dystopic fictions (a symptom of nihilism), we already inhabit a highly fictionalized world predicated on ‘the economy’, even before credit swaps and options; the sublimation of everyday objects into a commodity form is wholly dependent on a sublime fiction. As the supreme energy driven by capital-fictions steer reality towards pyramidal inequality (with a steeple) and socio-climactic devastation, we must seize upon the recursive power of fictions to repurpose their plastic force with an ethos of jujitsu-like acceleration. 

The Accelerationist critique of dominant leftist strategies with respect to simplification, slowness, localness and ‘68 era protest techniques is most welcome, a position embodied more colloquially in Jodi Dean’s quip that ‘Goldman Sachs doesn’t care if you raise chickens’.Although admirably tackling questions of Promethean scale, they neglect the politico-economical force of fiction in their purview. Neglecting the role of fiction in the anticipation of an alternative future forecloses the necessity of belief and commitment to said belief, crucial to any political project of ideological and operational restructuring. What we need are not only novel forms of activism and tangible intervention played out on the algorithmic/technological/organisational plane (amounting to more than mere sabotages of current systemic weaknesses such as false rumour hacks of twitter-feeds leading to brief market crashes and public relations disasters), but more importantly, new logical fictions where an imagined ‘we’ can incline towards an ‘uncancelled’ future, foretasting the incorporation of novel thought as a recursively alternative political practice. 

The pairing between logic and fiction may at first appear to be odd, as some sort of basic fact vs. untruth dichotomy. Let us step back for a moment to erase such oversimplification, and affirm Alain Badiou’s claim that ‘Every world possesses its own logic, which is the legislation of appearing’. When we apply this to Jacques Rancière’s understanding of dialect, logic is akin to the distribution of the sensible, or even more succinctly, what counts as making sense within a given sociological condition. When politics, according to Rancière, is equal to a redistribution of the sensible, it is equal to the creation (or perceptibility) of a new logic—that is, a new (legitimate) regime of appearing and being (ac)counted (for) within a given socio-economic order—and this, to my mind, includes not only peoples and places, but also ideas and the fiction of futurity itself. Following the Modernist poet Wallace Stevens’ trajectory of thought, the intersection of poetry with politics allows us to experience the contingency, or fictional character, of our given order (the incommensurability between sense and sense). Expanding upon the manner in which Stevens’ understands it, poetics is the creation of novel grammatical structures and general semantics that uncalcify common sense and render the given order entirely plastic and subject to de-re-formation. It was, after all, the poet Rimbaud, who coined the term ‘deregulation’ in relation to words and meaning, before it was appropriated by contemporary fiscal policy makers. The first fictional step is poetry, in rendering the laws dictating common sense fluid and contingent (the sense of possibility). The second step is supreme fiction; it is the energetic organization of ‘sensed’ poetic plasticity, where an alternative fictional formalisation becomes navigable (the articulation of the possible). Supreme fiction is a noological machine of orientation, it is always unfinished, yet maps out exploratory points equal to the constituting of an alter logic, and to echo Badiou, it is precisely this supreme fiction we regrettably lack and so urgently need.
The task of inscribing supreme fictions is the anticipation of the re-legislation of appearing in the world; and like everything that does not yet exist (the state of futurity), it exists only within the domain of imagination. If imagination is the ability to make present what is absent, it is the capacity ‘to think, in a world, what does not appear within the world,’ the capacity to ‘think’ the inexistent. Without introducing an artificial chasm between thinking and doing (between mind and body), thinking alone is not enough until the thought is performed (in a movement of recursive incorporation), for this is, as Kierkegaard notes, existing in what one thinks. This imaginative thought turned existential practice is the fidelity to ‘metanoia’—a term indicating a transformation of thought, of seeing the world in a novel way that (again, recursively) redefines reality itself—it is the experience of one’s plastic existence. It is that moment from which you can never turn back, a rupture in your understanding of the semantic pillars bracing the logic of a world. There is no certainty with metanoia, no guarantee as to the outcome of this ‘new light’, it is entirely speculative—it is a risky fiction predicated on the incorporation of thought, and becoming prey to that living thought. Becoming prey to metanoia is an experience of fundamental weakness in letting oneself become ingested by thought. It is where the sovereignty of the self is usurped, and consumed by thought casting a subject in fidelity to the existence of an inexistent logic. A subject is born through the active becoming-prey to thought, animated by the trace of an idea whose sustenance is the ‘bread of faithful speech’. Such is the forcing of a new logic.  

The fidelity to metanoia has largely been derived from the field of literature, but the written word is only one possible source of existential transformation. Metanoia is irreducible to word alone, but any thing (material or otherwise) capable of affect, where language is more humbly an ontic operator for us humans, in the hyper-chaotic ontology of a world. It should be asserted that metanoia, if it is to take on any political import beyond individual transformation, must exert a noological force upon the fictional plane of the generic—that is, on the ‘we’ of a collective people, or a ‘trans-individual’ plane. A politicized metanoia is the collective bringing closer to reality of an inexistent, an alter logic from which a novel world is possible—an insistence on a supernumerary possibility obfuscated by the logic of ‘what is’.
Metanoia, as a motivational impetus driving an alter logic of a world that ‘could be’, is here directly linked to the concept of the general will. The incorporation of metanoia as a general will is the affirmative means through which a collectivity is bound together, authorizing the production of a new logic, and therefore a new world. The general will, or perhaps better, the generic will (of axiomatic equality), is the yoking of the concrete individual with the abstraction of the ‘we’. Since the ‘we’ is an abstraction, it does not itself exist in reality as a mere count of the population. It cannot be known, and this is precisely why fiction is necessary, especially if we are to further our notion of an abstract ‘we’ beyond anthropocentric horizons of political congregation. The uncountable ‘we’ as a concrete inexistent, yet abstract existent, can only be touched by an imaginative space of fiction since there is no proposition of futurity to be verified as knowledge. And just as Rousseau has asserted, it is only through imagination—that mediating force between sense and intellect—where the measures of the possible can be exceeded, and the immediate bounds of our concrete local experience can be sensed in an abstract global reality. The fictional ‘we’, driven by the collective existential impulse of metanoia, can only be an abstract fiction, for abstraction is the enunciation of detachment to the logic of a world as-it-is. In this way abstract fiction is a gesture of violence—not the nihilistic violence of dystopic narratives that plague us today, but an affirmative violence in exiting the as-it-is logical condition. Furthermore, this abstract fiction is located in the future present (in the ‘what will have been’) requiring the anticipatory exercise of imagination as a ‘violence from within that protects us from a violence without’. 

One may suggest that the evil of late, or cognitive capitalism, is abstraction itself: the abstractions of money/systems of exchange (especially from the financial sphere) and the category of labour itself (the division of labour across the entirety of society). On the one hand, value-extraction within the paradigm of cognitive capitalism is wholly dependent on the increased abstraction of globalized capital, often pilfering from that most basic human impulse and capacity for communication (a commonly shared general intellect, or social knowledge as such), subsuming the entirety of life to its imperative force. The vehement effect of abstraction upon everyday existence is, no doubt, the reason why so many tactics seeking to resist total absorption resort to concrete, localized, immediate and direct modes of opposition. Yet to oppose abstraction tout cours is also to deny the category of the ‘we’, or the common, upon which it depends (as well as negating several advances—technological infrastructure—made under the paradigm of globalism). The question is not about obliterating abstractions, as if there is some fundamental, concrete core of pure humanity to return to (an essential ‘natural’ human state). No, the question revolves around how to deploy the power of abstraction towards an alter logic that redistributes the constellation of life, exchange, production, and consumption. As Matteo Pasquinelli has argued, this power of abstraction is endemic to humanity as a species—it is the power of the organism (and more precisely the human brain) to invent new norms in relation to its surroundings by exiting the as-it-is condition. Abstraction is not some malevolent force to be tossed aside, but is at the very least a mode of survival (mere life, or physiological existence) and an adaption mechanism (protection, care of the self). At its best, abstraction is an impetus towards sur-vival (more life, beyond simply physiological needs), an apparatus of projection conducive to the shaping of futurity as such. The task of abstract fiction under a regime of cognitive colonization is not only to distinguish itself from the as-it-is logical condition (for utter separation can easily become nothing more than a tactic of solipsistic retreat); it also involves the generation of new connections to and within a world. This task, according to Rousseau, is the artful exercise of politics, the fictional work of moulding new associations, with one part xeno (or making something alien) and the other part philia (the forging of a new bond).
The logic of the world we inhabit today is dependent on the integrated thought and performance of infinite economic growth, with the assumption that competition between actors is the ‘natural’ motivator of continual innovation in order to gain marketplace advantage (with the ‘neutral’ market being the most efficient mechanism to sift out winners and losers). This logic is most evident in the proliferation of the debt economy, for it can only operate under the presupposition of an ever-more prosperous future where debts can be reimbursed. In reality, however, this type of debt-bondage essentially cancels the possibility of a future (not to mention undercutting the illusion of the free market), instantiating in its place a society subtended by asymmetric power relations, between the few who supply credit and the rest who are indebted (such relations are never subjected to the egalitarian promise of open markets). This is one footprint of the logic that traverses social bodies today in the so-called ‘third wave of capitalism’, a logic that forecloses on the future as its very core principle (except one premised on deepening crises, inequality and climactic devastation). And, it must be added, this is also a logic of essential competition/propriety that actually impedes innovation through increased monopolisation of possible intellectual/developmental resources. Such footprints lead to the conclusion that this nebulous hyperobject we call ‘the economy’, whose transcendental presence compels all of us (including its detractors), has become a veritable ‘broken hammer’. When ‘the economy’ is grasped as a tool of distribution, production, consumption and valuation, the ready-to-hand quality it may have possessed is now quite blatantly unready-to-hand. In the parlance of Heidegger, that which is ready-to-hand is transparent, such that we deploy it as a tool seamlessly to complete an end goal. In contrast, unreadiness-to-hand is when the tool becomes opaque because of malfunctioning or is no longer capable of performing its intended task. The global economic meltdown of 2008 displayed the unreadiness-to-hand of the neoliberal economic (and ideological) tool—yet the response to this ‘rendering opaque’ of malfunction has been a structural re-strengthening of the same broken logic, indicating a frightening withdrawal of (global) political imagination towards the creation of a new logic. Beyond mass depression, attention deficit, panic and anxiety disorders (the cognitive response to a logic of a world in violent crisis rendered normal via psychopharmacology), the non-adaption to the unready-to-hand condition of ‘the economy’ that dictates the ‘nature’ of our existence seems to be the greatest psychopathology of our time. 

The continued success of the neoliberal 2.0, or cognitive capitalist project, especially under conditions of empirical failure to deliver on core promises of an infinitely ‘better’ future (more individual trickle-down wealth), not to mention the death of an ‘enlightened capitalism’ where working hours would be greatly reduced, is a signal that rational responses and strategies alone are insufficient to reclaim the future. Indeed, the call for more economic rationality holds no weight at all, as Marina Vishmidt points out, since in the neoliberal ideological program—where models drive a reality that drive models, ad infinitum—negative, objective results are met as blips, detours or exceptions of ‘the most efficient’ (or least bad) system. Vishmidt points out that no amount of counter-information or exposure of contradictions will weaken this core logic, and the only way forward is to drain this ideology of its legitimacy. This is crucial, yet only amounts to one step in the process of creating abstract fictions necessary for the anticipation of a new future beyond annulment—the step of separation from the existing logic (xenos). The second step requires affirming a new bond with an alternative logic (philia) towards which a ‘we’ can incline in belief. 
Returning to the question of ‘what sort of world we want to see performed,’ a question that seeks to harness the potential of logical recursivity is, fundamentally, an ethical question. It is not only a call for the creation of models to propel alter movements of circulation within the sphere of economy, but ultimately a question as to what ends we want to deploy the tool of economy beyond our enslavement to its ideological imperatives? Like all ethical questions, we are required to speculate on a good (and most certainly not the least bad), and because that good is inexistent, it requires prophetic acts of imagination to authorize its ideological impetus traversing an abstract ‘we’. Although fictions today (and our capacity to anticipate something alternative) seem colonized under a regime of rent-driven finance capital, it is not the time to undermine, nor merely point to the hypocrisies of the intellectual apparatuses that brought us to this point. It is, rather, time to seize the power of their fictional infrastructure that fails to deliver, and repurpose its energy towards a logic of serving the many. Such repurposing requires not only the concrete construction of models able to map the complexity of a global situation, but also, and above all, the vigor of anticipation—an abstract fiction—that compels our collective, ethical inclination in the fabrication of novel associations with each other and with the surroundings. The forcing of such an abstract fiction is nothing less than the creation of a logic orienting a ‘we’ towards the constituting of futurity (the inexistent) beyond the existent, unbounded by what-is.          


[1] The Mont Pèlerin Society was inaugurated in Switzerland in 1947 with a group of 39 scholars (mainly economists) and continues to the present. Founding members include Friedrich Hayek, Karl Popper and Milton Friedman.
[2] In Donald MacKenzie’s study of the financial turn in economics, he particularly highlights the incorporation of the futures market within the mainstream economy and the role of the self-fulfilling prophecy (positive feedback) of mathematical models upon reality. The first battle of the futures market was for it to be legal, making a distinction between delivering an asset (legal) and delivering in cash only (a wager, and therefore illegal). Through expensive and time-consuming lobbying and commissioned reports (for example, Milton Friedman’s ‘The Need for Future Markets in Currencies’) the Chicago Board of Options Exchange (CBOE) was born—born of collective action paradoxically based on the economic ideology of a rational egoist. The thriving of the CBOE was due largely to the Black-Scholes-Merton model of efficient pricing (a Nobel prize winning model)—instantiating the market as wholly legitimate and not merely a site gambling. At first the correspondence between the model and actual prices was fairly inaccurate (the model did not reflect reality), yet as traders began to rely on the model—taking up its mathematical claims of legitimacy, directly using it’s projections in their practice through the dissemination of purchased pricing charts—the model began to create reality, it became a tool of the trade, or what MacKenzie calls ‘an engine, not a camera’, a (once inaccurate) model (now) driving reality.
[3] In particular the proposal by MIT academics Alex Wissner-Cross and Cameron Freer to distribute ‘optimal intermediate locations between trading centres, “leading to this science-fictional scenario of a terraforming inhuman distributed finance:” unmanned pods of densely packed microprocessors overseen by next-generation AI bots processing billions of orders streaming out of unmanned AI pods positioned optimally around the world, the silent beams of high-frequency orders shifting trillions across the earth’s oceans at light speeds, all automated, beyond the scope of humans to remotely grasp the nature of the transactions.’ 
[4] The Syrian Electronic Army’s attack on Barack Obama’s Twitter feed where a shortened URL directed users to a 24 minute video of terror attacks committed by US supported rebels, along with their hacking of the Associated Press Twitter account citing a fictitious attack on the White House that caused US Stock Markets to sporadically loose 200 billion US in value. 
[5] I am summarizing rather briefly the extended thought of Rancière and Badiou, who share some core agreements (axiom of equality), yet who diverge (dramatically) on the point of creation of Truths. A critique of Rancière by Badiou can be read in two chapters of Metapolitics.

