Contesting the modern obsession of decontaminating a reality of “mere” appearances to uncover authentic truths, the work of artist and writer Hito Steyerl delivers us into worlds where the offspring of fiction and fact plot out staccato-like narratives. Her practice redirects the essayistic documentary genre in our age of global mediatization – setting images, ideas, places and figures into alter-orbits of movement and intersection with one another. With attentiveness to the apparatuses that buttress our contemporary networked lives, her work is propelled by the interplay between the material and the immaterial and, more importantly, by the affective potentiality that emerges in their crossing. Mingling elements as diverse as the plight of the intern, an airplane junkyard in the Californian desert, Susan Boyle’s audition, a bondage photo search in Tokyo, the grey of Adorno’s lecture room, the JPEG algorithm and a homemade teenage kung-fu film, to name only a few, her work embodies the spirit of a specialist generalist, where no subject or source is superior to anything else, for it is in their complex imbroglio that all of these forces compose the logic (or illogic) of reality itself. 
I’d like to begin with the force of cross-pollination in your work. For me, this conjures up notions of the middle – the middle as a site where things meet. I recall reading an elaborate idea of the middle from Brian Massumi who noted that the “middle” (“milieu” in French) has a triple signification: surroundings, medium (like a chemical substance) and being in the midst.[1] The middle is a messy, entangled space of intersection, substance of conjunction, coupled with the concatenating power of the “and.” This complicated middle seems to me, the best place to start a discussion concerning the ethos underpinning your practice, as your works, texts and lectures present us with a rewoven tapestry of reality resulting from the crossing of seemingly distant or unrelated figures/things – you create spaces where they meet. 
We should be careful not to blindly celebrate the idea of the middle. Just as it can be space where colliding ideas, objects/images and places meet to set off other conceptual courses beyond didactic causality, so too can it be a disorienting condition. Horizon lines, metaphorically speaking, are hard to sense in the midst of action. Your book Die Farbe der Wahrheit opens with the anecdote of the CNN reporter using a mobile phone to transmit live low-res images of the start of the 2003 Iraq invasion. The reporter whips around in an armoured vehicle broadcasting shaky, non-identifiable blotches of dancing colour. The images represent nothing discernible, but they nonetheless work in an authentic way because of their embedded proximity – where the closer we get to reality, the more undefined it becomes. You call this the foggy-relation of modern documentary. These images impact us in an absolutely truthful way, insofar as they speak to our uncertain, precarious reality that defies any clear-cut mode of representation. This depicting of “truth,” however – the once assumed critical capacity of the documentary genre – serves merely to mirror and feedback into our pre-existing images of reality plagued by anxious indeterminacy. Your notion of critical documentary on the other hand, seeks the displacement of image-mirrors, calling for the fabrication of other affective constellations that do not yet exist. We are faced with a crucial distinction here concerning critique worth highlighting: a critique that does not stop at exposure, but that creates other perceptual conditions through which coming-realities may find a space to circulate.
If we would compare your work as an artist/essayist with that of the CNN reporter, you both start from this precarious, disorienting middle. I suggest this because your work acknowledges the necessity of grasping one’s own position in the midst of a situation. The CNN reporter proceeds to transmit an uncertain foggy reality as it is up close, whereas your practice deploys this proximity to tap into the semantic latency of real situations, images and concepts – the virtual – and works though a series of interconnections to plot out potential narrative structures to produce a type of connective-disjunction. This connective-disjunction is where we see the potency of the “and” in your work: that while the “and” introduces an encounter between divergent or distant things/ideas, it also dislocates, producing detours in common-sense reality in which we are all embedded. 
I’m not sure where you stand on this interpretation, but there are also two other points I am curious to hear your thoughts on. The first concerns your take on critique from the middle so to speak, a mode of critique that no longer subscribes to the possibility of achieving “distance.” Can you elaborate on the relationships between connectivity, critique and virtuality at play across the spectrum of your practice? The second point extrapolates upon the dislocation of reality, where your works often travel from a particular thing/person/situation to the general – or in some cases, to the global – in a movement of reverse site-specificity. How does your process of dislocating particularities work in the context of this other mode of criticality, what I would call “affirmative” since it is tasked to create and not merely to expose? 
What I was getting at with the “middle” has little to do with a centrist political position, a position negotiating consensus, but with a space of confrontation between divergent things and narrative trajectories, like those staged in your practice – a space where common sense is “bruised” because of conceptual collisions. I like your word “bruised” since it is evocative of an ideological injury, not to mention that bruising is the result of ruptures below the surface leaving visible traces. Bruises can be seen, and definitely felt. 
I’m fascinated about your emphasis on the “medium”; it is a thing, a substance as well as a figure (sometimes even a mystic) who can interpret and translate signals. There is an eloquent passage from your book where you talk about the “language of things” producing a silent symphony of matter – an energetic vibrancy. Things – and thingliness – seem to be taking on a more prominent role in discourse of late. How do things and images speak in your practice?
I agree. I suppose what I was getting at has to do precisely with those terms of speaking. Without turning things or images into mere puppets to channel another “master” voice, they still require a degree of dramaturgy or staging in order to tell us something, to enter the realm of communicability. Perhaps a better question concerns the coexistence of things/images and theatricality. To my mind, this dramatization has less to do with representation and more to do with the creation of possible worlds to and through which that “thing” contributes.    
The dramaturgy of things exceeding predictable narrative patterns or limits, like the “medium at the edge,” calls to mind Walter Benjamin’s seminal text “The Author as Producer”, wherein he calls upon artists to not merely mimic the historical apparatuses of production of their time, but to transform them by way of technique, or technology, in a process of re-engineering. This thesis comes about not from asking how works stand in relation to contemporary production procedures, but how they stand in them – casting a distinction between being an activist only in attitude (content), and not in production (form). In my view, your practice speaks to Benjamin’s call, and extends it to the sphere of truth production at large in our post-Fordist era, characterized less by the production of goods (at least not in so-called advanced economies) and more by the production of environments (milieus), lifestyles and images impressed upon living itself. For example, in your critique of the foggy-modern documentary, the truthfulness of the image does not arrive via its contents or research, but through its expressive capacity to project an aura of authenticity, trading off representation for expressiveness. Caught up in the transmission of authenticity are not only relations of knowledge and power but also something more elusive: the phantasmatic supports that function to legitimize a certain apprehension of truth. For me, your practice seizes on the potential inherent to the gap between phantasy and legitimacy, on how the transposition of these myths upon reality can be articulated otherwise and unleashed beyond the limits of common sense. Driven by the interplay between facts and belief, the re-engineering of this transposition, as you also point out, is not distinctly immaterial or semiotic, but is also composed of substances and material interaction. How does the ‘medium at the edge’ resonate with a transformative technique in the creation of other affective configurations?
If life itself has become “occupied” – where leisure time and labour time collapse into one another – have we not overcome a certain alienation that was at the crux of practices ranging from the Situationists to Relational Aesthetics – and surprisingly, is still perpetuating)? Is alienation no longer something to fight, but in fact something we may need to fabricate in order to liberate life from occupation? 
The transformative capacity of artistic labour has historically been considered as something “other,” caught up in exceptional discourses of the genius and standing outside of standard conditions of production. In our era, however, artistic labour has become a paradigm of the ideal working subject: creative, flexible, communicative, self-designed and in many cases, perpetually in audition mode for possible wages – or simply visibility. The labour of artists today is no longer de facto exceptional; its performative ethos has permeated the everyday life of non-artists, perversely fulfilling the avant-garde dream of a merging of art and life. 
You have written extensively on the predicament of cultural labourers, in particular tracing the transformation of the word “work” into “occupation.” I believe you even tracked this down to some European Union level where the term has been changed in legal documents concerning labour practices. With “work,” we had a means-to-an-end equation, the exchange of labour for a product or wage, whereas “occupation” signals an era of labour characterized by endless processes unbound to results – a shift from an economy of production to an economy of waste. “Occupation,” as you write, presents us with a rather amorphous topology – signifying idle activity, consumption, and distraction – but also it connotes the military colonization of sovereign autonomy. So the implications of an occupational shift seems rather bleak to say the least. Yet, as is so often the case in your practice, you turn this dismal analysis on its head: where occupational techniques could be deployed as a form of resisting forces of occupation, in a kind of tactical Jujutsu. You cite the territory of this resistant occupation as a space of affect. Can you elaborate on the reverse potentiality of “affective” occupation? If the labour procedures of the art world are complicit, even exemplary, in the shift from work to occupation, how can our own, arguably self-willed (or narcissistic) labour conditions be contested? 
Implication, whether subjectively willed or simply an unavoidable condition of living in a world seems to be a key force in your work; you are also often literally “implicated” in your films. The state of being “implicated” carries a double sense that is both one of overwhelming envelopment captured in a network of global socio-economic circulation, yet also a potent state of being that, from the inside, can re-inscribe the world in other narrative realities – as minor or humble as this may be stemming from the art field. So through all the doubts, diagnoses and grey zones, this state of being implicated conjures, other mythic, or better “factish” constellations are always possible. To me, this doubly articulated “implication” in your work signals a battle against cynicism. It’s a cynicism that generates a rampant state of disavowal where we “all know better, but…” – not only in the art world, but as a general condition of contemporary being. 
Nice example! So, provided one can handle surprise encounters and objects, the state of being implicated is a form of agency. I think the optimism at the heart of this example is quite important actually, since it transforms the nature of implication from one of condemnation or complicity, to one of involvement or situational presence. I’m still not quite sure, though, that I understand your reversal of the cynical dictum.
