For decades we have spoken about the death of
the author, but no one really believes it. Every disavowal of
authorship is seen as a stroke of genius, a clever new take on
a timeless concern. The less we see the hand of the artist in the
work of art, the more we want his or her signature or at least
a voice. Even the formation of collectives is not so much a
renunciation of authorship as an overinvestment in it. The less
there is to say, the more important it is who’s speaking.
I am speaking to you today to make a proposal. Just first
let me elaborate.
The most sustained critiques of authorship
have been made from the spheres of art and education;
however, not coincidentally, these spheres have the greatest
investment in the notion. Credit and accreditation are the
mechanisms for attaching symbolic capital to individuals
via degrees and other lines on CVs. That curriculum vitæ—
[to the audience] the course of my life?—is the paperwork I
keep because nobody else does! It’s
an inverted credit report, evidence of underpaid work, kept
orderly with an expectation of some future return.
Today, authorship is the singular connection between my life
and my CV, my self-presentation. More than that, it is my
inability to break that connection, which hardens with time.
But I’ve invested so much.
This is by no means restricted to the
professionalized fields of art and education. One familiar
example marches hand in hand with the increasing prominence
of the CV: “social spaces” on the Internet, which historically
would include bulletin boards, chat rooms, forums, and now
social networks, have become progressively less anonymous.
Moving behind B, caressing shoulders, soothing.
Now Facebook compels us to attach our real identities
to a single “profile,” and we work on maintaining that
profile for whoever is watching. All of this work, this selfdocumentation,
this fidelity between our selves and our
papers, is for what, for whom?

What is the consequence of a world where every person is
armed with their vitæ, if not a “war of all against all”? It’s
that sensation that there are no teams, that everyone has
got his or her own jersey, not to mention all those reports
of feeling “stuck,” “paranoid,” “depressed,” “floating,”
and “wanting to get out.” My intention here is not moral
judgment but unblinking description. What if authorship were
not just another slain metanarrative, but rather the neoliberal
foundation for the slogan Everyone is creative?
Outsourcing, crowdsourcing, any way to get work done cheaply, maybe even pay by giving them credit. Money doesn’t matter as much when they’ve got credit cards.
Rather than taking authorship as a monolithic foundation of contemporary capitalism, to be
affirmed or opposed—and the possibility, let alone the efficacy,
of opposition is a question here—perhaps we can think of
it as a mechanism, or a process, or a point of intervention?
My proposal is for the formation of something in between a
school, a collective, a secret society, and a union. Let’s call it
an escape act.
Assuming
everyone here is willing.
First, we lose our real names.
This isn’t an absolute change of identity; instead, we’ll count
our numbers and invest in that many fictional individuals.
Second, all of our cultural activity, whether individual or
collective, will be done under one or more of these fictional
names. It’s not simply that each of us will have an alter ego,
but that we’ll have a multiplicity of alter egos available for use.
Third, when one of these characters is offered an exhibition,
residency, lecture, interview, performance, teaching position,
or whatever, then any of us, and any number of us, might go.
It will be a matter of joint discussion or convenience. Fourth,
when any money is earned through sales, salary, commission,
or stipend, it is shared equally.
Fifth, if one of
us wants to exit this arrangement, then we’ll “kill” one of the
fictional individuals. The specifics are up to those who remain.
There’s no doubt our system will come into irreconcilable
conflict with the dominant one. To pick a mundane example,
under present conditions none of us could realistically receive an MFA. Perhaps one of us could contribute one? My point
is that this act of ours is as much a learning process as it is
an intervention. We will need to generate our own analysis
of the art market and the art world; we will need to generate
that knowledge that is otherwise known as collectivity; we will
need to develop theories of contingency and sharing.
stares out at the audience.
I appreciate your patience and attention.
Are there any questions? Shall we begin?