
Last month, I made a trip to the construction site of the Facebook’s first data center not located in the United States. It is in Luleå, Sweden, a 15 hour train ride north of Stockholm, right by the Arctic Circle. The building is massive — 317 meters long, 100 meters wide, and 15 meters high — you can’t see from end to end, as if it has its own vertical horizon. It is based on the same basic layout as their Prineville, Oregon facility - the entire top half of the structure is devoted to cooling. The idea is that cold arctic air enters and is mixed with hot air produced by running thousands of servers. It is progressively filtered and humidified until it gets to a precise temperature and moisture content, whereupon it is blown through the hot servers to keep them from breaking down.

The first day I visited, a large group of men emerged from a door near the top of the data center building and descended the temporary staircase in a line. It was probably the closest the building would ever come to its ‘workers leaving the factory’ moment, because after construction is completed in March, there will be only 30-50 jobs created there. Right now, there are 220 people employed by Swedish construction company, NCC, to build the data center. Originally, the estimate was 300 - but that was based on American techniques, where they build more on-site; in Sweden, components are outsourced and shipped to the site, meaning they need fewer hands.

On the other side of the Internet from these fat buildings are us and our thin computers, getting thinner by the year. You can picture the evolution: from Desktops to laptops to tablets and mobile phones. To make our computers more mobile, processing power and storage is externalized to the cloud. But this distance - this spatial expanse - is overcome by fast connection speeds and smooth interfaces. The devices are literally smooth, so smooth they seem like they were produced by magic, untouched by the human hand; the dominant aesthetic values of user interface design appeals to principles of simplicity, cleanliness, and clarity; and we don’t have to wait 30 seconds for the modem song to be connected. More and more, it’s a question of how many WiFi networks there are, or how many bars we have, not whether or not we’re connected.

The Facebook construction site is carved out of the forest, as if the trees have been shaved off like a beard. There are supposed to be 3 giant buildings here one day, each containing 4 server halls, where the actual computers will do their thing. But for now, there is just the first building and a hole carved out of the forest where the rest might be someday.

Its servers are meant to handle traffic from Europe and the Middle East. This means that the so-called ‘Facebook revolutions’ (like those protests and popular revolutionary movements in Iran, Egypt and Tunisia) would happen here, in Luleå. At least in part. There are many reasons for building the data center here and one of the most important ones is that Sweden is politically stable, that the risk analysis people say that the odds are it won’t have any kind of revolution itself; and so it’s a safe investment. The air is cold, so to speak.


I became interested in data centers last year after coming across an interior photograph - the server racks have a striking resemblance to library stacks. When you think about the thin computers - Kindles and iPads, for example - as books, the comparison becomes even more unsettling. (The proliferation of data centers comes at just the moment that library collections are being deaccessioned, hours cut, and some branches closed entirely.) On these devices, a person needs to agree to certain “terms of service,” have a unique, measurable account, and provide payment information; in return, access is granted. This access is not ownership in the conventional sense of a book, or even the digital sense of a file, but rather a license that gives the person a “non-exclusive right to keep a permanent copy… solely for your personal and non-commercial use,” contradicting the First Sale Doctrine, which gives the “owner” the right to sell, lease, or rent their copy to anyone they choose at any price they choose.  Such contradictions are symptoms of the shift in property regimes, or what Jeremy Rifkin called “the age of access.” He writes that “property continues to exist but is far less likely to be exchanged in markets. Instead, suppliers hold on to property in the new economy and lease, rent, or charge an admission fee, subscription, or membership dues for its short-term use.” 

Of all the reasons Facebook ended up in northern Sweden, the single most important one is the Lule River and the cheap hydroelectric power that it generates in 15 power plants along its length. It used to take decades for the cost of electricity to exceed the cost of a server and so electricity was a marginal expense. But now, it is only a few years until the cost of running the thing costs more than the thing itself, making electricity decisive.

It also used to be that buildings requiring a lot of power, a paper mill or a factory for example, would have to be situated near to a river in order to generate enough to push the machinery into motion. With motors and electrical power stations and high voltage transmission lines, a factory could be situated almost anywhere as long as it was hooked up to a source of electricity. The sources of power could be more and more distant, in places one would rarely visit.

Microsoft (who has moved quite deliberately into data centers) released a publication three years ago about the “fourth paradigm” in science, which observes that most important scientific research is now engaged with observing, analyzing and visualizing data, rather than the material world. We discover new diseases and their cures looking through computers. And this data, a model of the world and its phenomena, is stored and processed in data centers. Here is the cloud - not confined to scientific data, but everything abstracted into data - business transactions, music and film, correspondences, personal photos, and so on.

About 30 kilometers north of Luleå is the closest plant, in Boden. The Facebook data center will consume as much electricity as the small city of Boden does. And data centers worldwide consumed as much energy as the entire country of Sweden - or they did 3 years ago. It seems as though the scale of data centers is so large and their activity so opaque that we constantly make these comparisons to make sense of it. Heidegger wrote about hydroelectric plants on the Rhine in his ‘Question Concerning Technology’ - in contrast to the windmill, which directly converts wind into energy, the hydroelectric plant stores up the energy of the river to be converted at will - nature has become a resource, a thing for human use rather than simply a thing in itself.

It’s difficult to tell if anyone is working at these power stations. In one video that I saw on the Internet, it featured a woman who would drive around Norrboten County and check up on the infrastructure to make sure that everything was OK. Once they’re built there’s really not much of a need for anyone to actually be there - in fact, it is probably a liability for someone to be there because what if they get bored, or angry about the terms of their last contract? This is probably how it will be with Facebook, once it is finally done - very few workers who are employed not to keep things running — that’s something else — but to stop things from falling apart.   


The biggest investment in Luleå, prior to the datacenter, was the steel mill built in 1940, now operated by SSAB. A railway connects the mill to iron ore mines in the mountains to the north west - LKAB trains roll in several times a day delivering product from Malmberget and Kiruna. There, much of the drilling and shuttling is done with automation and remote control. Since the late 1970s, the Swedish steel industry has been restructured, which means that more computer control has been introduced, and many jobs eliminated. At that time, the entire industry was “in trouble,” or in other words, they weren’t profitable.

There’s a video of one of the engineers building the Prineville Facebook data center who says, “this is a factory, it’s just a different kind of factory than you might be used to.” I think that the SSAB steel mill is the kind of factory he is talking about.  The steel mill almost seems proud compared to the data center. It is visible, upright, and muscular. Something from a past era really; or maybe a passing era. The data center is monstrous; an absurdity in the landscape, trying to be discreet, trying to move in without drama and then keep to itself. It doesn’t give much of itself - in fact all it really does is collect data. Its workers are spread across the globe, usually bent in front of a computer, but more often now staring into their hand. They enter data, upload 100 million photographs per day, and the data center has to be always on the collect it all.

The future of Luleå is not in steel, it is in data. They’ve rebranded the area the Node Pole to attract other technology companies to bring their data here. They are advertising one site right next to the SSAB steelworks. Another site is in a former sawmill. A paradigm shift, say the business people.


When I visited, the people in the blue offices refused to give me a tour or let me visit the building. I found out later that a Google executive had surreptitiously gone on a tour and taken some photographs prior to my arrival, resulting in a minor scandal. Data centers are supposed to be very secure. 

They store an immense amount of equipment and technology and within that they store an immense amount of data. Really, they are constructing a mine. There will be valuable raw material in there somewhere, but no one knows quite what it is yet. 100 million photographs are uploaded to the mine every day, and they want to know what’s really in there. Algorithms trying to figure out what structures exist underneath and through the ones that we can see? Or, maybe it’s not a mine, but a power plant for human resources. Our social energy as a resource that can be stored and used at will. This data center would be the placid side of the dam and the algorithms are the things that open the gates and convert all of that social movement into energy, and into work, and into profit.

No one knows how many data centers there are on the planet, but estimates say from half a million to three million. Because they require so much capital investment, decisions on where to locate them are not based on sentimentality, ethics, or ideology, but on risk and cost-benefit analysis. They spread across the planet according to an autonomous logic outside of direct human control. They find unlikely places, occupy relics of the 20th century like Model T factories, limestone mines, printing presses, military bunkers, even shopping malls. One can’t help but wonder how many there will be when this is all over - will the age of data centers ever be over? - What kind of super-ruins will splatter the landscape? Will the data have been migrated to a less hostile climate? Or will bits of it remain, left for the future archeologists of the fourth paradigm?

What kind of culture can we produce on these platforms? We typically say they are merely tools for organizing and publicity, no different than say, a cell phone or a poster, and that we would simply make use of whatever was available. But I think that the restructuring that’s occurring is much deeper than that - in the same way that a lab culture that used to be in a petri dish is now in a data center, it seems as though so much culture (artist-run or otherwise) is platformed.

Where does one draw the lines between (1) platforms that one is willing to use (2) alternative platforms that should be constructed in place of hegemonic or corporate ones (3) activities that must resolutely reside outside of computation and digital networks? Even within and across these divisions there are further subdivisions, recombinations, and movements.